> To what extent can the play be seen to have, directly or indirectly, a social or political purpose? 
 
**Thesis**: In "Art", Yasmine Reza uses characterization to illustrate the effect of perception and pseudo-intellectualism on friendships. The extent of Marc's influence on Serge is revealed on page 53: "You should never leave your friends unchaperoned. Your friends need to be chaperoned, otherwise they'll get away...". The reason Marc is angry is not because Serge has bought art that offends his sensibilities -- instead, he is angry because he thinks that Serge is involuntarily drawing himself away from Marc's influence. This quote shows the condescension Marc holds towards Serge and how their entire relationship has been a facade. This thought is mirrored by Serge as well -- "My friend Marc’s an intelligent enough fellow, I’ve always valued our relationship, he has a good job, but he’s one of those new-style intellectuals, who are not only enemies of modernism, but seem to take some sort of incomprehensible pride in running it down… In recent years, these nostalgia-merchants have become quite breathtakingly arrogant". This monologue by Serge shows how his perception of one of his closest friends has been clouded by pointless intellectualism and how their relationship has only grown more fake over the years. Finally, Yvan's characterization by Marc seals the deal: "You have no substance Yvan. You're flabby, you're an amoeba". Marc calls Yvan an "amoeba" to highlight Yvan's tendency to act as a bogus mediator in order to cover up his own insecurities. 
