# Worldview Autobiography
## Response
I have been born as a Hindu and have partaken in all of the religious rituals required of a newborn Hindu. I had a naming ceremony, got my head shaved, got fed honey at 6 months. I got sent to India to live with my grandparents for 2 years. Every Saturday, we hold a somewhat informal *pooja* where we light incense and candles, make a *prasadam* for the God to eat, chant a few short hymns, and do a *sashtanga namaskaram*. My parents aren't exactly religious fanatics, but I think we're more connected to India and its culture than other families. In my elementary and middle school years, my mom used to shuttle me between classes that taught me Telugu, holy songs, and even (for one horrible month) dancing. Because of this constant exposure to Hinduism, I viewed it as a somewhat benevolent force -- until I looked at Indian politics. 

After India's independence and Partition, I saw the carnal violence that could be roused from a simple difference in religion. Muslims killed Hindus purely because they were Hindus -- not because of any character flaw, just the fact that the religion they had was an enemy of theirs and had been for centuries. (A possible source of Muslim superiority might be from the Mughals, but I don't know). Because of this, Hindus killed them right back, and this destructive cycle continued. It's even continued until now -- with the BJP in power, multiple measures are being taken to disriminate against Muslims, and Muslims are fighting back again. Because of this, I became disillusioned with Hinduism and questioned all the stories prevalent inside it. Did Rama *really* make a bridge out of rocks with monkeys? Was there an actual Dwaraka? Eventually, I accepted that Hinduism was a powerful religion, but like most other large religions, it was powerful in the fact that how easily it could be used to manipulate people.

The most fascinating religion story in 2020 that is going on is the BJP's rise to power in India. I liken it to the rise of Trump -- people are hoping that a more nationalist government might be able to change the quality of life in its own respective country. In some ways, it has -- the BJP has decreased corruption and increased the defense budget. In more ways, it hasn't -- there is more conflict thanks to the BJP's Hindu Nationalist policies.  

