# 2.1.1 Discussion



## Questions

* Looking at the information provided for this discussion, state which seems better to you: a .300 batting average in baseball or a 12.5 point per game scoring average in basketball. Justify your answer.

- Looking at the information provided for this discussion, state which seems better to you: a .311 batting average in the National League or a .301 batting average in the American League. Justify your answer.
- Why are points per game in basketball skewed to the right, while batting averages are nearly symmetrical? If instead of plotting points per game, you plotted average points per 10 minutes of court time, do you think the distribution would still be skewed?

## Answers

1. You can't just look at the numbers and say one is better than the other; proportions and the way the data was gathered matters too. For baseball, the proportion of people getting a .300 batting average is $23$, while the proportion of people getting $12.5$ points per game is $59$. However, the number of basketball players in the sample is only $1.4$ times as much as the baseball players, and when we compare the two numbers we see that there are around $2.5$ times more basketball players than baseball players who got $12.5$ points. Therefore, 

$$
\fbox{a .300 batting average is better.}
$$

3. The points in basketball are skewed to the right because  the data itself is purposefully biased -- the NBA took out the people who weren't on the court for enough time, positively skewing the data. However, if the NBA collected their data per $10$ minutes of court time rather than per game, the distribution would not be skewed because the low "outliers" would appear again. 