# Choosing the Design of an Experiment

> The Academy of Sports Medicine Physicians is interested in determining whether a new training regimen will help long-distance runners improve their performance in marathons. This organization comes to you for some advice on how to design an experiment to test whether this new regimen is more effective than the standard regimen. You have access to a sample of long-distance runners on the track teams at ten different universities. You hope to conduct the experiment over the course of two years because the regimen takes a long time to learn and because you want to include new runners in the sample as they join the track team. You also believe that the effect of the regimen on performance may differ for men and women. Your challenge is to design an experiment that uses a randomized approach to measure the effect of the new regimen on performance. Remember, your design should take into account your concerns about different effects for men and women and should be set up so that new subjects can be properly included in the experiment. Create an experiment that will address these concerns. Pay particular attention to the factors, explanatory and response variables, any blocks or matching characteristics, and the treatment conditions used in the experiment. As much as possible, use diagrams instead of words to summarize your experimental design. (6 points)  

First, I would block the subject in terms of gender, separating them into a male block and a female block. I would randomly select half of each block to be assigned to beginning the new regimen, and have the other half of each block act as the control group. When new recruits came along, I would block them first and then randomly assign them to either group. My explanatory variable would be the type of regimen and my response would be marathon time. 

> A farm cooperative has asked you to design an experiment that measures the effects of light exposure on the growth of tulips in the Skagit Valley of Washington State. You hypothesize that tulips exposed to more direct light will grow at a faster rate than those exposed to less light. You also wonder whether the effects of light exposure persist when you control for the amount of moisture the plants receive. You want to create a randomized comparative design that considers three factors with the following levels: 
>
> - Light Exposure (No, Yes) 
> - Amount of Light Exposure (3 hours a day, 6 hours a day, 9 hours a day) 
> - Amount of Moisture Exposure (1 hour a day, 3 hours a day, 5 hours a day) 
>
> You have 1,000 seedling plants at 12 different nurseries to use in your experiment. Your experiment should run six months in length. Outline the details of your experiment. In your answer you should comment on a strategy for randomization, identify all the possible treatment groups, and discuss what might be a possible response variable. In addition, you should identify a couple confounding variables and discuss a method of controlling for one of these variables. As much as possible, use diagrams instead of words to summarize your experimental design. (6 points) 

